Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lobs. And
today I'm joined for a third time by Doctor
Robert Sapolsky. And today we're talking about his latest
book, Determined The Science of Life without free will.
And I'm also leaving the links to our first
two interviews in the description of this one. So
Doctor Sapolsky, welcome back to the show. It's always
a pleasure to everyone.
Well, likewise seeing you again and uh glad we're
on the other side of the pandemic. A pleasure
to be here.
OK. So in our first two interviews, we talked
a lot about the science of human behavior and
this time focusing on questions surrounding free will and
determinism. Are there specific aspects of the science of
human behavior that you would deem to be the
most important here when considering these types of questions?
Well, um just as a preamble, my, my song
and dance is that there's no free will. We
have none whatsoever. Um WHICH puts me fairly far
on the extreme of the continuum of people thinking
about this. Um BUT that we have no free
will at all. And this is relevant to everything
about how we became, who became uh individually, all
of that, why you just did what you did.
Um But in terms of where that's most important,
um just to focus on the very narrow area,
which is anything but narrow. Um The biggest implication
of that is none of us are entitled to
anything. None of us have earned to be treated
any differently than anyone else. Of course, we may
need to be treated differently. Uh Like if you're
uncontrollably violent, people have to be protected from you.
Um If you have extremely good motor skills through
no, you know, achievement of your own, uh Maybe
you're a candidate to be a good neurosurgeon, but
none of us have earned the right to have
our needs be considered more important than anyone else's.
And so, uh it's one thing to try to
answer the question of free will. I mean, if
it exists or not, but another thing is why
and when people believe in free will, I mean,
are there specific cues that people pay attention to
specific variables that play a role in how much
free will people attribute to themselves or to someone
else when evaluating a particular action?
Well, you're right and people almost universally uh believe
that they are the agents of their action. Um
Like 90% of philosophers fall into a camp uh
called compatible list views of free will. These are
people, they're not saying there's magic, they're not taking
theological stances, whatever they say. Yeah, the world is
made of atoms, we're made of cells like we
believe in all that stuff. Yet, somehow here's how
free will still like pops out of your brain
and do a lot of hand waving at that
point. Um So it's incredibly common view. Um Like
all of our other features of our beliefs and
temperaments, um It's kind of context dependent people really,
really are more likely to believe in free will
if someone's complimenting them and saying good job, they're
really looking like to like, likely to under circumstances
where things have come up short. I mean, there's,
there's this classic dichotomy and sort of us, them
thinking that with them, when thems do something awful,
it's constitutional. That's what they're like. They've always been
like, they'll always be like, and when one of
us does something awful, it's situational. Yeah, you have
to understand they were under a lot of stress,
there were financial pressures, they had just been whatever,
um, as to how stable our us this is
and we're often being pretty nasty when we're attributing
unchangeable them ness to them. Um, IN that regard,
we're very, very malleable when it comes to how
characteristically free we are. When things are going well,
people believe in free will when things are not,
there's a tendency to go in the other direction
but not in a globalized. There's no free will
whatsoever. Here's the extenuating circumstance that screwed me up
just now that kept me from being the wondrous
free, consistent person that I am. Yeah, something came
up. But overall, overall we are the captains of
our fate. Mhm
But uh let me ask you about one criticism
that perhaps many people, scientists particularly would have of
uh your position. So we have a, a good
understanding or at least to some extent of the
science of human behavior, the factors that play a
role there uh from genetics to the environment and
culture. But uh I mean, there's still lots and
lots of details that we are missing. And it's
really hard to be able to predict with a
very high level of accuracy how people will behave
in any particular point in time. So, the fact
that there's still fairly low predictability, do you think
that that's an argument against your position?
Um No, and that's, that's like a fantastic counter
ment to bring up because it's very essential. It,
it obviously is very essential. Um Like I, I
have sort of a hobby by now that I
uh help uh public defenders uh who are lawyers
defending poor people who can't afford uh their own
lawyers in murder cases for people who have a
history of traumatic childhoods, uh concussive head trauma and
such teaching juries about the brain. And what always
happens is I get to do a two hour
presentation and then the prosecuting attorney gets to cross
examine me and they always nail me on exactly
these lines. So, are you saying every single person
with this type of brain damage would do what
this guy did? I'd say, no, we can't say
that. Could you have predicted this guy? No, we
can't. Um Part of it, a fundamentally deep response
is um when you look at uh chaotic systems,
systems that run on chaotic system, like us, our
brains, our cells, our molecules, our societies, um a
critical thing about them is they are unpredictable. They're
still deterministic and lots of people mistake sort of
chaotic and the unpredictability of it as proof that
somehow we could transcend our molecules. But on that
level, in this very fundamental way, um systems that
are entirely deterministic can nonetheless be completely unpredictable. A
much more mundane answer is, well, yeah, we're still
finding out stuff. And when you look at our
knowledge about sort of the biology of human behavior,
like 99% of what we've learned about it has
been in the last century, 75% has been in
the last 50 years, 51% has been in the
last decade, 25% of it has been since like
we started this broadcast or whatever, like the rate
at which knowledge is pouring in is incredibly fast.
So there, there's this sort of indirect cheating strategy
that one can then say, which is OK if
we're all going to accept that tonight. At midnight.
That's it. Science is done. We're never gonna find
out anything new again. This is everything we know
at this point. The answer is, yeah. Nonetheless, we
can't predict a whole lot about human behavior. Um
But everything we know about the exponential increase in
knowledge is over and over and over, we're gonna
continue this pattern of saying, oh, I had no
idea. Biology had something to do with that. And
like you have a choice at this point, do
you wanna be on the cutting edge of viewing
that we are nothing more or less than biological
machines or do you wanna be like the history
of science example in a century of just the
primitiveness of what people still believed at the time.
And so one of the things uh also that
people bring to the table in discussions surrounding free
will and that people use in law and in
the courtroom has to do with intent. So, from
a scientific perspective, what is intent exactly? And what
do we know about it? And do you think
that its intent in any way would make for
a good case for free will in any way?
Yes. Let me, let me just be really uh
sort of over the top here. Um As a
scientist, my definition of intent as a subject to
consider when thinking about free will. Um INTENT can
be defined as boring as hell and totally irrelevant.
Um OK. Why is that? Um THE entire legal
system, as you said, runs on that. Um, WHEN
somebody did something awful, did they intend to do
it? And did they know that they had alternative
options? Um And did they understand what the consequences
were going to be? Um And if the answer
to all of that is? Yeah, lock them up.
They intended to do what they did and they
knew there were alternatives. Um And in sort of
the neuroscience world of free will where intent comes
in is the most influential crazy making experiment of
all time in the field. This is something that
came in the early 19 eighties by a man
named Benjamin Lit. And you read any paper about
the biology of free will and like the person
is almost required by law to mention lit by
the second paragraph, these were these amazing studies. He
took people and wired them up with sort of
electroencephalograms, eegs to record brain activity in different areas.
This was like Neanderthal era technology at the time,
you couldn't do brain imaging then. But this very
simple approach. Um HE said to people, OK, whenever
you want, press this button and they had things
to tell when the pressing process actually started by
seeing when muscles started constricting in his arm. And
they could see what was happening in the motor
cortex, the part of the brain telling those muscles
and they could see the parts of the brain
that would tell another part to tell another part
to tell the motor cortex to do that. And
the earth shattering finding that he came up with
was all of this playing out in about a
half second or so. You could tell when the
brain had decided it was time to press the
button because before the person was conscious of their
intention to do it by about 200 milliseconds, 2/10
of a second. And oh my God, your brain
has decided before you were conscious of intending to
do this. And everyone like went crazy over this
because this is just proven there was no free
will until like people started arguing about. When do
you become aware of intention? And is that different
from when you intend to do something? And, and
you know, all this philosophical stuff of, is there
a difference between intending to do something and intending
to stop yourself from doing something? The difference between
free will and free won't? And they're still fighting
about this. This is 40 years later for a
scientist, there was like a paper a couple of
years ago entitled like Livid. Had no idea what
he was talking about or, or something slightly more
like formal than that for people to still be
telling you that your science was wrong 40 years
after you did it, this is like immortality for
a scientist. They're still fighting about what this finding
means. Does your brain know that you're intending to
do something before you're consciously aware of it. And
I scream every time I see yet another one
of these studies because as I said, it's boring
as hell and totally irrelevant. And in a courtroom
as well, did this person intend to do that?
Because none of it asks the only relevant question
there is. Oh, yeah. Where did that intent come
from? Where did it come from in the first
place? Because to answer the question of, did the
brain have intent before you did that's playing out
in 2/10 of a second when you're asking, where
did that intent come from? What does that have
to do with what was going on in your
brain one second ago? And what was happening in
the environment one minute ago? And what hormone levels
were like one day ago and how traumatic or
stimulating the previous one year had been and what
your adolescence was like in your childhood and your
fetal life and your genes and the culture your
ancestors invented because that influenced how your mother was
raising you within a minute of birth. Where did
that intent come from? And the metaphor I use
in the book is deciding whether or not there's
free will based on what's going on in that
last half second and only knowing what the intent
was is like deciding whether you like a movie
or not by just having seen the final three
minutes of it because you've missed everything. It doesn't
matter if the person intended to or not. Where
did that intent come from? And that's where the
legal system falls apart in terms of their thinking
about, you know, punishment and blame. And that's where
most thinking about whether or not there's free will
falls apart because everybody is just interested in their
brain imaging studies telling you what happened in the
last three milliseconds. And that tells you nothing because
something about what happened to you this morning had
something to do with it. Something about your fetal
life had something to do with it. Something about
the culture, your answer came up with 500 years
ago, had something to do with it. And when
you look at all those pieces from one second
before to millennia before and you put all those
pieces together, there's not a damn inch in there
to shoehorn in an ocean of free will operating
independent of all of that stuff.
Mhm So when it comes to behavioral science, we
always hear about nature versus nurture genes, the environment
does when it comes to free will specifically, does
it matter at all if uh we're talking about
uh for example, biological factors or environmental factors? I
mean, do we have any more control, for example,
over our environment and how it affects our behavior
than we have over our gyms, for
example, zero in both cases in the fundamental ways.
I mean, what one is obliged to do in
my business at this point is saying, nature and
nurture always interact and you can't pull them apart
and asking which contributes more is like what's contributing
more to the area of this rectangle, the length
or the width they always interact and that sort
of thing um within this realm. Um The summary
I would get at is we are nothing more
or less than the sum of our biology, which
we had no control over and its interactions with
the sum of our environment over which we had
no control over. And they're completely inseparable. I mean,
it's the simplest example of like, oh, how important
was environment in this sort of case and its
interaction with biology? Wow, what explains the fact that
I'm sitting here right now and have a occupation
that carries some prestige and westernized culture and all
of that, what did environment have to do with
it? Starting with environment prenatal environment. The fact that
my, my mother was not suffering from malaria or
Chagas disease or like any such thing and wasn't
protein starved because she was a nomadic pastoralist in
the Sahel, in Africa. And like, oh, like we're
talking like at that level already. That's like what
we're talking already at that level. That's part of
the brain that you wound up being uh handed
to you here in adulthood. Um All of that
stuff matters and it's inseparable.
Mhm One very interesting thing that you talk about
in the book is the Behavioral Science slash Biology
of luck. What is that about
it? It's, that's ultimately everything, everything we're talking about
here. Um Another way of saying, oh, the sum
of our biology and this interaction with the sum
of our environment is we are nothing more or
less than the outcome of our luck and anyone
who claims otherwise that they earned their good luck
or that it makes sense to punish them for
their bad luck. Um All we are is the
outcome of biology, interacting with environment in the context
of luck. And there's this whole thing like child
development, um try to make sense of who turns
out to be like the the violent adults and
the drug addicts and all the, all the bad
outcomes and like no surprise childhood has a huge
amount to do with it and it's been formalized
into this thing. Um At least in sort of
uh United States called your ace score A ce
the sum of your adverse childhood experiences. And there's
this ace like questionnaire scoring system where you can
get from 0 to 10 and zero is you
had no adversity 10 is like you had all
of the following 10 horrible things happen to you.
Were you a witness to physical violence or psychological
violence at home? Were you a victim of physical
violence or psychological violence? Were you a victim of
sexual abuse? Were you in a broken family? Was
there a weapon at home when you was there,
a family member who was incarcerated this whole list
there going from 0 to 10. Um, AND what
you see is for every single step, every point
you add to somebody's ace score. Um, THERE'S about
a 35% increased likelihood that they're going to be
involved in violent antisocial behavior by the time they're
adult. If they're a male, there's about a 35%
increased chance that they're gonna have a teenage pregnancy.
If they're female, about a 35% increased chance of
either that they're gonna have substance abuse and addiction
problems every step in the way. And this is
one way of formalizing like this is the quantified
science of shitty luck in childhood. And it has
always struck me that at the same time. Instead
of making it an adverse childhood experience score, you
could make a ridiculously lucky childhood experience score. Did
your parent or parents read books to you? Did
you have a stable income? Um Did you never
have to worry about food? Did you play games
and laugh at home? Whatever? Come up with a
score of that and it's gonna tell you forever.
Each step in those, there's a 35% increase that
you're gonna be working a prestigious white collar job
someday and have an office and a secretary or
who knows just a different way of explaining the
same thing. Um Everything that we frame as morality
is instead the outcome or of good or bad
luck. And we have built a world in which
we punish or reward people over the luck they
had nothing to do with.
Mhm. But, uh, as we go through, uh childhood
adolescence, adulthood and our prefrontal cortices develop, we tend
to gain or acquire more self-control, more impulse control.
Does that not count at least as a few
more degrees of rhythm?
Right. Let's look at the sentence you just said
as we get older, don't we acquire more frontal
cortical self control? What does acquire mean? It means
you're lucky enough to be in an environment that
would have taught you that it means you're lucky
enough to have a brain at that point where
you could learn from those experiences. It means that
you're lucky enough that the counter examples every day
when you finish school and went outside and there
was the, your gang telling you let's go rob
that liquor store. Um Let's do something impulsive that
reinforces your frontal cortex not working very well. How
many of those were going on at the end
of the day? Do you go home and you're
bullied by somebody at home and anything you heard
during the day about like the wonderful path ahead
of you? Thanks to self control goes out the
window. Be Yeah, we learned. Oh, wow. Didn't you
learn somewhere along the way that self control is
a bad thing for you if you're a fetus
and your mother is very stressed and secreting a
lot of stress hormones. You're going to be born
with a frontal cortex that's already less developed than
average and newborns. Meaning 15 years later, you're getting
great lessons in life about the importance of self
control. And by the time you were a damn
fetus, you were already less likely than average to
be able to learn those lessons and benefit from
them every step along the way. Where did that
intent come from? Where did that learning come from?
Where did the opportunity for that learning come from?
And it's always, you know, all that stuff that
brought you to this moment over which you had
no control.
And when it comes to our psychological traits, we
know, for example, from disciplines like behavior genetics that
there's the role of genes and then the shared
environment, the non shared environment, unique experiences we go
through. Isn't there any space at all there for
some, uh I mean, for us to have some
sort of be, be able to play some active
role in the kind of person that we're going
to become?
Absolutely. Um And that's one of the ways in
which uh people should avoid the hysteria of deciding
genes, determine everything that genes are the most interesting
things. If nothing else, you have this whole field
of epigenetics, the ways in which experience can change
how readily genes of yours are turned on or
off. For the rest of your life in some
cases. OK. So we're moved away from a genetic
deterministic picture for a zillion reasons, uh both biological
and environmental. Um But you're saying, can't we choose
to take an action to take a conscious action
which will change our destiny? And the answer is
not in the slightest, you look at two people
who were given an opportunity and one is this
person who every single split in the road, they
always take the wrong direction. They never miss an
opportunity to miss an opportunity at everyone. You could
have. They, they would have given you that job.
They were offering you a scholarship. The guy said
you didn't have to drive the car when they
were going to do the robbery and oh my
God, every time that person makes the wrong choice,
every time they come up with the wrong intent
and where did that come from? And when we
seemingly have made a major decision on our part
about something in life, are you going to rob
the store? Are you going to study hard? Are
you gonna propose marriage to this person or you?
Who knows what? Um And that feels intent. Um
Everything about the biology and this interaction with the
environment that came before that is what brought you
to that moment. Like from everything. Like if you're
hungry, you're more likely to commit an antisocial violent
act. If somebody smells good to you, their pheromones,
you're more likely to find them. You claim that
they are more vis visually physically attractive if you,
you know all this stuff, what, what this, at
the split in the road? Do you make the
right decision or not? What this taps into is?
I think the most pernicious way in which people
hold on to. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. There's biology
and we have brains and all of that and
it just made a brain gunk. Um, BUT we
have free will, we have free will. Is this
dichotomy people bring in? You look at somebody who's
7 ft four and of course, they're a great
basketball player or you look at somebody and they
have particular ratio of slow twitch to fast twitch
fibers in their leg muscles and of course they
turn out to be a good marathoner or maybe
even you understand enough about receptors for this or
that neurotransmitter. And of course they have a good
memory or good. Any of these. We're pretty good
at accepting the biology of what our natural attributes
are. Some people have lovely voices and others don't.
And they're never gonna sing in an opera. Some
people have, yes, there's these natural attributes. OK. Ok.
Ok. Science biology has something to do with that.
But oh, where free will comes in is what
you do with your attributes? Do you squander them?
Do you work hard to overcome your limitations? Do
you, are you one of these people like you
go on youtube and there's unbelievable examples of this,
of like marathoners and like important races where they
collapse 53 ft from the finish line and they
crawl, they crawl to the very end. And you
say, oh my God, this is amazing with what
they did with what they were given. Or you
find like somebody raised in poverty in a horrible
neighborhood and all of that who somehow winds up
like with their Nobel Prize at the other end,
or somebody who grows up in great wealth and
privilege and they're a junkie by the time they're
20 they've spent half their fortune. Oh, your attributes
you have no control over. That's the biology. What
do you do with the attributes? That's where we
have a world of, oh, what a self indulgent
squander. What an inspiring role model, how they worked
to overcome. There's something in there that we believe
that things like your memory or whether you have
perfect pitch or things like that are made of
biology and how hard you work and your self
control and how indulgent you are and all of
that somehow that's made of other stuff that's not
made of biology. And when you look at it
like what happened to you as a fetus is
going to have something to do with the construction
of your part of the brain that has something
to do with whether it splits in the road,
you always make the bad decision, you every step
of this is biology as well. Um But there's
this very strong emotional pull to differentiate between the
two and willpower and backbone and fortitude and all
of that, that's the stuff we admire because that's
the true measure of who somebody is independent of
their neurons and molecules of it's made of the
same stuff.
And so um is there any space for an
idea like meritocracy in this sort of deterministic world?
I mean, if someone just so happens to have
the psychological traits that tend to correlate with success,
for example, in industrialized societies, like greed, conscientiousness, high
intelligence and so on. Should we at from, from
a scientific perspective? Of course, I'm not talking about
uh philosophy, a philosophical perspective nor any of that.
Does it make sense to attribute any personal merit
to them?
Yeah. Um The only possible, scientifically acceptable and morally
acceptable conclusion from all of this is there's no
circumstance in which blame and punishment make moral sense
or are uh are good things in and of
themselves. And likewise, there's no circumstance in which praise
and reward are virtues in and of themselves because
nobody earned one or the other, that sort of
thing. This comes with two provisos though um the
first one is like every now and then it's
useful to punish someone because it changes their behavior
in an effective way or it's useful to praise
somebody because in an instrumental sense. Um Praise and
blame could be useful, not because of what somebody
did in the past that this is retribute but
for shaping their future behavior just in like a
psychological engineering kind of way. Um So that's not
saying it's not possible, it's never useful, but just
as another way of influence the influencing the biological
machine. Um The more fundamental level is when you
say crazy stuff like I just did to people
they say, oh, so you want just murderers running
around the streets or? Oh, you just want it
randomly picked who's going to do brain surgery to
take out your tumor. No, of course not. Even
if you get rid of the entire criminal justice
system as it now appears. And as we should,
because it's built on biological nonsense of the most
destructive kind. Nonetheless, people who are uncontrollably dangerous and
violent where you can't fix them, you gotta protect
people from them. Um, A car whose brakes don't
work. You don't let it out on the street,
you put it in the garage and you like,
don't drive it, but you don't preach to either
that violent person or to the car whose brakes
don't work that they have a crummy rotten soul
and they don't deserve to be able to do
this and what you have to do instead is
use a term that's more and more in like
this. People thinking this way is they have to
be quarantined, quarantine them so that they're not dangerous
to anyone and not an inch more. And not
because there's anything about it that they deserve the
brakes don't work on their car and then the
flip side is exactly the same. Oh, my God.
So, what, we should just have a random lottery
as to who, who, like, does brain surgery on
you. No, of course not. Just as you can't
have dangerous people on the street, You need the
most competent people out there doing the medicine, doing
the legal stuff, writing whatever it is that takes
um skill that matters, that's really important. But you
just the same, you can't sit there and tell
that person because they have a wonderful soul or
a wonderful self discipline or whatever that they deserve
to have this ridiculously large income. Like a world
built around blaming people for their antisocial behavior makes
no sense. And a world built around rewarding people
for their prosocial behavior or their expertise makes no
sense either. Um And is ultimately just as morally
corrupt because if you say you are a brain
surgeon and getting enormous societal prestige because you did
something where you earned it, you deserve to do
that and be in that position makes as little
sense biologically as saying the brain, the uh the
murderer with a history of frontal cortical damage deserves
to be in prison all of that. Um Yeah,
it's the flip side. A meritocracy makes no sense.
A justice system built around retribution makes no sense
either. But at the same time, dangerous people should
not be allowed to damage people. And competent people
should be more likely to be running the world
than less competent people. But no one should feel
shame or pride for which end of those Katina
they wind up on.
But even if there's not really space for blame
or praise or to consider or to think that
someone is responsible for their own actions, do you
think that it would still make sense to talk
about punishment? At least as a deterrence measure or
for example, blaming or praising someone just because we
know scientifically that if we do that, we would
be disincentivizing bad behavior, incentivizing good behavior and conditioning
people to behave in better ways.
Absolutely. And it's the same biology that like you
take a, a sea snail and it could learn
that when you like bop it on the head
with a pencil, it retracts its gill mechanism or
some. Yeah, you can shape sea snails behavior, you
could shape human behavior, you could shape human behavior
to be more or less adaptive, blah, blah, all
of that. And yeah. Yeah, sometimes it requires punishment
and sometimes it requires praise and reward. Um But
just because that's like another thing you can do,
sometimes intervene with somebody who's got problems and make
sure they uh they get enough calories in their
diet and things will go better sometimes like you
hit someone over the head and say they, they
can't do this anymore and they'll stop doing some
rotten behavior. Yes. But never with a sense that
you are doing a moral good because that's completely
irrelevant. It's just another realm in which we as
biological machines can be shaped in our behavior.
And what do you think about, uh, the idea
that some people put forth that, uh, ok, even
if we know that free will does not exist
that it doesn't make sense to talk about free
will. People should still believe in free will because
if they don't, they will be worse people. I
mean, do you, or do you think on the
other hand that, uh, telling people that, uh, they
should abandon their belief in free will would actually
improve their lives?
Ok. This is, this is ultimately like the most
important question to ask whether or not we have
free will. Should we all believe that we do?
Um, ONE worry which you bring up is if
we stop believing in free will, we're all gonna
become murderers and cheats and liars and we will
run amok. Um And this is the thing people
worry about, uh, most instantly and there's a cruel
experimental psychology literature showing that if you take like
volunteer test subjects and you manipulate them into feeling
like there is less free will than they thought
there was 10 minutes later, they're more likely to
cheat on a test, they're more likely to do
something crummy to somebody else. When they're playing a
game, morality and ethical behavior goes down. That's it.
That's exactly what, like the problem is when you
tell people, um, like you can't be held responsible
for anything. They've run amok. Just like if you
convince someone that there is no God and thus
there's no punishment, they run amok also. And then
you look closer at it and because there's this
parallel literature, you have test subjects and you convince
them, manipulate them into believing, lesson God and right
afterward, they cheat more and they do the same
crummy stuff. But now you do a different version
of these studies, get someone who comes in and
says, I haven't believed in free will for 10
years or I haven't believed in God since I
was a teenager or any. You get people who
have thought that way and felt that way for
a long time who got there. Not because some
like psychology professor is manipulating them in this environment.
But you get people like that who've thought through
this for a long time. And they are exactly
as moral as the most religious people and the
people with the strongest sense of belief in free
will. And this fascinates me, like in terms of
the God issue, you look at people who very,
very strongly believe in God and the whole show
that goes along with that or very, very strongly
believes there is no God. And as I said,
there's no difference in their levels of ethical behavior
and it's very high in both cases who are
the ones who are less ethical, the ones who
are in between, the ones who say, oh, I
don't know, I guess there's God and like, I
make sure the kids learn something about it because
it's good for them and like, the, the ho
are good or say God, I don't, I don't
actually care. Maybe there's not a God, but it's
like, what does it have to do with me?
The people who are like indifferently religious or apathetically
atheistic, the ones in the middle, those are the
ones who you readily manipulate their moral behavior, one
direction or the other. If you've spent a hell
of a long time sitting and thinking about the
root of human goodness and evil and what we
owe our fellow humans and is their purpose in
life that transcends us. It doesn't really matter if
your conclusion is there is a God or there
is no God or we're free agents or we
have no free will whatsoever. You're one of the
ones who thought long and hard about it and
both sets of conclusions you come out as being
more ethically moral than your average person. Um So
people are not going to run amok if they
are raised from the very beginning to think this
is not a world where it is fair. To
blame anyone and I don't deserve to get this
or that reward more than anyone else. They're going
to be past the notion. Oh, no one's gonna
hold me responsible. I can go and stab the
old lady there with any luck to be past
that by the time they're like, 20 years old.
And I was here hearing all the time people
saying that hard determinist were all nihilists and atheists
and they were all the time, uh, pillaging and
raping and murdering people.
Exactly. Because that's, that's the logical first thing. Um,
THE logical second thing that was also, went back
in your question is when you get past, oh,
should I run amok and do whatever I want
all of that is, should I get depressed as
hell? Because there's no purpose to any of this?
There's this huge existential void out there. Should I
like, is this terrible thing to have people believe
in terms of their mental health and stuff? Um,
AND a point, like, it took me five years
to write this book and the 1st 4.5 years
I was thinking the answer to that was gonna
have to be. Yeah. And that sucks. And it's
awful. But, you know, that's how things work and,
like, come on, we need to be adults and
face reality and it finally struck me the much
more meaningful answer to it, which is, if you
are convinced there's no free will and you get
totally depressed and empty void because it means your
accomplishments. You didn't really earn that. The people who
loved you don't really love you for who you
are. But for biological stuff that you helped this
old woman cross the street just now. Not because
you're a good person, but because that's how you
function as machine. All that. Oh my God. This
is so depressing. If that's your response, you're one
of the lucky ones. You've got the luck and
privilege to sit there and say, oh my God,
maybe I really didn't earn my wonderful university degree.
Oh my God. Maybe I didn't really deserve to
be liked by people because of my personality. If
you're someone who has spent your whole life paying
the price of your parents, poverty or the fact
that you don't have an attractive face or the
fact that you have the genes that deep predispose
you towards obesity and people recoil from overweight people.
Or because you turned out not to be so
smart or it turns out you can't control your
behavior because of biology. All that getting rid of
the free will concept does is be liberating. You
don't have a shitty soul because your life has
not turned out that well. And for most people,
that's the much more important outcome to all of
this than deciding, oh, I guess I really didn't
earn my million dollars to be a millionaire. Um,
FOR most people getting rid of the concept of
free will is not gonna make us like crazy
and nihilistic. Um It's gonna be liberating. Mhm
But uh going back just for a second to
one of the initial points I brought to the
table when it comes to the fact that we
do not yet have a complete science of human
behavior and we cannot 100% predict how someone will
behave in a particular situation. Uh What if someone
heard your arguments of behavioral scientist and said, oh
OK, Dr Sapolsky, your arguments are great, the science
is awesome. But since we still do not have
a complete picture of human behavior, at least for
the time being, I will refrain from making absolute
claims, uh claims regarding free will. I will wait
and see. I mean, basically what I'm asking you
is do you think that the fact that we
do not yet have a complete science of free
will uh would make uh such a claim that
we should reframe, refrain from making such absolute claims
about free will uh make
sense, right? Um Two types of answers there. The
first one is um yeah, it's gonna be so
hard to subtract out thinking there's free will because
we don't have the solid scientific facts yet. For
centuries, all we've done over and over is figure
out that responsibility turns out not to have something
to do with our behavior. Turns out hailstorms are
not caused by witches, it turns out people who
have epileptic seizures are not possessed by Satan or
even within the last 50 years or so. It
turns out people come down with the disease. Schizophrenia,
not because their mothers were psycho dynamically, monsters who
hated them. And all that happened at each one
of those points is you tell the mothers of,
you know, hundreds of thousands of people with schizophrenia,
it's not your fault. It's a neuro genetic disorder.
All you've done is freed them all you've done
when you figured out that this kid in your
classroom where you're a teacher just can't learn to
read and this kid is just lazy and un
mot no, there's something in their cortex that could
be identified by scientists so that they reverse letters
in their mind. They have dyslexia, it's not their
fault. We can't explain yet who gets dyslexia and
who doesn't? We have only hints from prenatal environment,
blah, blah, blah. But we know enough that it
is both intellectually and morally bankrupt to decide that
this child is lazy and unmotivated and to instead
recognize we've identified their particular type of biological constraint
and all that's going to happen in the future
is more and more and more of those. And
all we can be at this point is accepting
that a whole lot of things that pulls out
the ugliest in us in the way of judgment.
We're gonna wind up saying, oh my God, I
had no, I had no idea. It had something
to do with that or framed a different way.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, we can't sit there and say
somebody with this sort of upbringing, we can absolutely
predict that they're gonna wind up going to a
top university or wind up being a multiple murderer.
Yeah, we can't predict that yet. The science isn't
good enough. The science is good enough on a
population level. Any time you could look at an
entire population and say for every increased incidence of
a horrible childhood experience, you've just increased 35% the
likelihood that they're going to be arrested by the
time they're 20 you got enough science. At that
point, you've got enough science that you better know
you have no leg to stand on. If you
sit there and say this kid this 20 year
old, what can I say? They're just plain evil.
This kid, if you 35% for each step, there's
enough science at this point, there's enough knowledge there.
If you have, I don't know whatever percent predictability
that if your mother was drinking heavily when you're
a fetus, you've got this likelihood of having an
IQ below this. And someday when you're failing classes,
we know enough science already. In all these cases,
we know enough science because we run an entire
society on statistical guilt and statistical wonderful accomplishments. And
we know enough now to know that those are
not OK.
So I have one last question then what would
it take for, for someone to convince you that
you're wrong and actually free will exists?
OK? Here's, here's my pain in the ass response.
And the philosophers are going to like, oh come
on, give me a break. Um The version that
they start off with is oh, come on, give
me a break is you've just done something, you've
pulled a trigger on a gun, you just did
something consequential And here's the muscles that contract it.
And here's the three motor neurons that just sent
that command. And if you wanna convince us that
free will actually exist, show us that those neurons
just did what they did independent of what any
other neuron in the brain was doing at that
moment. If you could do that, you've just proven
free will. And they say, oh come on, give
us a break. That's ridiculous. A demand. I would
demand a whole lot more than that. I would
say. Show me that those three neurons just told
you to pull that trigger, having nothing to do
with what any other neuron was whispering to it
at the time and having nothing to do with
your hormone levels that morning and having nothing to
do with your history of trauma and having nothing
to do with your genes. So show me that
if you had changed any of those, those neurons
would still have done the exact same thing at
that moment, then I'll believe in free will and
you can't, you can't show that because nothing going
on in you right now is anything but the
outcome of all of that stuff that came beforehand,
perhaps unpredictably, perhaps in some nonlinear, non additive cool
way, perhaps in an emergent way that we can't
even begin to mix. But that's all we are.
Nothing more or less and show me a neuron
that just decided to do what it did independent
of everything that came before that millisecond. And if
you could do that, I believe in free will
and uh philosophers are gonna hate it. But what
I think any biologist who knows this stuff would
say is, yeah, that's kind of what you need
to show. That's kind of the proof that is
needed to show that there really is free will
and that's pretty damn unlikely to be able to
show that.
OK. So let's see if someone accepts the challenge.
So, yeah, so the book is again, determined a
science of life without free will. I'm leaving a
link within the description box of this interview. Um
Doctor Sapolsky, just before we go apart from the
book, would you like to mention briefly where people
can find you and your work on the internet?
Um Let's see, I'm I am a medieval peasant
in that. Not only don't, I do Facebook, I
don't know how to, don't, not only do I
not do Instagram or any of these things that
my kids say that I don't understand. So I
have no presence there, but there's a bunch of
my lectures that have been put up on youtube.
Um I teach a class at Stanford every other
year on the biology of human social behavior. That's
basically the last hour stretched out over entire semester.
And years ago, Stanford posted all of those lectures
up there and one of these years I have
to update them. So go to youtube. Uh You'll
see I'm doing the exact same ranting and raving
word for word and a number of those like
talks that overlap, but that would be a good
place.
Ok, great. So, Doctor Sapolsky, thank you again for
coming on the show. It's always a great pleasure
to talk to you. Well,
likewise, thank you for having me on and uh
till next time this is fun.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you like what I'm doing, please
do not forget to share like, subscribe, comment and
to keep the channel sustainable. Please consider supporting it
on Patreon or paypal. You can find the links
in the description box of the interview. The show
is brought to you by N Lights learning and
development. Then differently check their website at N lights
dot com. I would also like to give a
huge thank you to my main patrons and paypal
supporters, Burger Larson, Jerry Mull Lawrence, Frederick Sune, Bernard.
So all of Alex Adam Kessel Matthew Winten, Beg
Arno Wolf, Tim Hollows, Erica J. Connors Philip for
Connolly. Then the Mere Robert Winger ruin you. Mark
Nevs Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil Kavanagh, Mikel Stormer,
Samuel Andre Francis for the Agns Fergal K and
Hale Herzog and Hes Mark Smith, El S Wilson
JP Charlotte, Adam Hunt. Pas Nele Bach Guy Madison,
Gary G Almansa Zal Adrian. Ye bin Jean Barbo
Julian Price Edward Hall Eden Bruner Douglas Fry Franco
BTO Lotti Gabriel Cortez Orlik Scott Zachary Fish, Tim
Duffy, Sonny Smith, John Ws Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgino, Luke Loi Giorgio, Theophanous Griz Williams and
Peter Walla and David Williams Theo Costa Anton Erickson
Charles. More like Shower Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Larry, the Lee Junior Old Herringbone Starry Michael Bailey,
then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zor and Jeff mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell Thomas Dubner, Luke Neeson,
Christo Kimberly Johnson. Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Nowicki Linda Brandon,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley George Katis, Valentin Steinman, Per
Rawley, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Hubbard, Liam Dua Away
Bi ma ma Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular. And I Herner
a special thanks to my producers is our AJ
Frank Luca Stein, Tom Ween, Bernard Ni Fortis Dixon,
Benedict Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin. Jean
Carlo, Mon Negro, Al Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Mafi Lavender as you
could and Bogdan K I thank you for all.